---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Hydronephrosis"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2021-03-17
published: true
labels:
  - Medical
---

*Abstract*
<br>
<br>Hydronephrosis is becoming a commonly diagnosed disease in prenatal ultrasounds and usually effects older aged males.  Hydronephrosis is the swelling of one or both kidneys.  The symptoms of this disease typically effect the urinary tract system by causing urinary tract infections due to the reflux of the ureters.  However, hydronephrosis can be detrimental to the respiratory, circulatory, and endocrine systems if not properly managed.
<br>A study investigates the relationship between infant prescribed antibiotics and urinary tract infections caused by hydronephrosis.  In this study being performed by McAlister University, investigators are trying to determine if antibiotic prophylaxis is effective in reducing the number of urinary tract infections in this population.  The study is being performed on infants between the ages of one to twelve months and are scheduled for renal ultrasounds at the ages of three, six, nine and twelve months of age. 
<br>The study is ongoing and will not have completed data until September 2021.  However, it has already been proven that antibiotics do help with people diagnosed with urinary tract infections.  This study is trying to show if preventable antibiotics work and are worth the risks. 
	Keywords: hydronephrosis, urinary tract system, antibiotics, infants
<br>
<br>*Hydronephrosis*
<br>The organs of the urinary system, also known as the renal system, include two kidneys, two ureters, a urinary bladder, and the urethra.  Kidneys are a vital part of the organ systems.  While the ureters, bladder, and urethra serve mostly for transport, storage, and elimination of urine, kidneys perform additional tasks.  They are glands that filter the blood and excrete the toxic metabolic wastes; perform a major role in regulating blood volume, pressure, and osmolarity by regulating water output; regulate the pH balance of body fluids, secrete the hormone erythropoietin to stimulate the production of red blood cells which in turn increases the oxygen capacity of the blood; regulate calcium homeostasis and bone metabolism; they detoxify free radicals; and in conditions of extreme starvation, they support the blood glucose level by synthesizing glucose from amino acids.  Kidneys have a close physiological relationship with the endocrine, circulatory and respiratory systems, and if diseased, can be deadly. 
<br>As stated by Saladin (2018) and shown in figure 2 on page 11, the kidneys lie in the abdominal cavity against the posterior abdominal wall at the level of vertebrae T12 to L3.  With the liver above it, the right kidney is marginally lower than the left kidney.  The middle of the left kidney lies around rib 12.  The kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, renal artery and vein, and the adrenal glands are all retroperitoneal.  Both kidneys and urinary system help the body to eliminate liquid waste called urea while keeping potassium, sodium, and water in balance.  Urea is produced when foods containing protein, such as meat, poultry, and certain vegetables, are broken down in the body.  It is then carried in the bloodstream to the kidneys, where the metabolic waste is then removed along with water, and other wastes, in the form of urine.  
<br>Urine typically flows from the kidneys to the bladder through the small tubes called ureters.  A blockage in the ureters can prevent urine from flowing properly.  Blocked urine may be caused by a narrow ureter, a kidney stone, or reflux (urine travels back up to the kidney).  It may also be caused by abnormal structure of the kidney.  Examples include a ureter that drains outside the bladder or swelling at the bottom of the ureters.  Having these kidney issues is called Hydronephrosis.  Hydronephrosis, broken down into biomedical word elements translates to: hydro- water; nephro- kidney; osis- condition.  It is a medical condition of swelling in one (unilateral) or both (bilateral) kidneys cause by urine buildup.  
<br>The most common causes of hydronephrosis includes vesicoureteral reflux and blockage of the urinary tract.  Urine, which is a liquid waste, normally travels one way from the kidneys through the ureters and into the bladder.  However, vesicoureteral reflux is when the flow of urine goes the wrong way or travels back up into the kidney.  This could cause infection or damage to the kidneys.  According to Carol DerSarkissian (2019), vesicoureteral reflux affects about 10% of children.  Although most children often outgrow this condition, people who have severe cases may require surgery to correct the flow of urine to protect their kidneys.  
<br>The blockage of the urinary tract can be caused by many issues.  In babies, blockage is sometimes caused by the growth of excess tissue, but there is no clear cause.  A urinary tract infection could also signal a blockage in an infant’s kidney.  The risk of urinary infection increases the severity of hydronephrosis with the potential to hurt the kidneys or ureters even more.  Whereas symptoms are not always apparent with hydronephrosis, urinary tract infections often occur when there are issues with the renal system.  Common symptoms for a urinary tract infection, listed by Mayoclinic in 2020, may include:
<br>•	A strong, persistent urge to urinate
<br>•	A burning sensation when urinating
<br>•	Passing frequent, small amounts of urine
<br>•	Urine that appears cloudy
<br>•	Urine that appears red, bright pink or cola-colored — a sign of blood in the urine
<br>•	Strong-smelling urine
<br>•	Pelvic pain, in women — especially in the center of the pelvis and around the area of the pubic bone
<br>According to Kidney.org in 2020, hydronephrosis is usually caused by another underlying factor.  Cleveland Clinic states, that in adults, the conditions that most often cause hydronephrosis include:
<br>•	Kidney stones: Stones that may become lodged in the kidneys or urinary tract.
<br>•	Cancer: Tumors in the bladder, prostate gland, uterus or other organs that are part of or near the urinary tract may cause blockages that disrupt the flow of urine.
<br>•	Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH): Enlargement of the prostate gland in men can cause pressure on the urethra, the tube that urine passes through before it leaves the body.
<br>•	Having blood clots: Blood clots can develop in the kidney or ureter.
<br>•	Narrowing or stricture of the urinary tract: This narrowing can be due to injury, infection, birth defects or surgery.
<br>•	Nerve or muscle problems: These problems can affect the kidneys or ureters, such as from diabetes mellitus.
<br>•	Urinary retention: Urine may be held inside the body due to an inability to empty the bladder.
<br>•	Vesicoureteral reflux: This is a condition when urine flows backward from the bladder to the kidneys.
<br>•	Ureterocele: This is a condition where the lower part of the ureter may protrude into the bladder.
<br>In women, hydronephrosis may occur as a result of:
<br>•	Pregnancy: As the uterus expands, it can press on the ureters and block the flow of urine.
<br>•	Uterine prolapse: A condition in which a woman's uterus (womb) sags or slips out of its normal position.
<br>•	Cystocele (fallen bladder): A condition that occurs when the wall between a woman's bladder and her vagina weakens and allows the bladder to droop into the vagina.
<br>Hydronephrosis most commonly occurs in middle aged men, however, hydronephrosis can occur at any age.   Laquerre J.  (2020) informs us that more than 42,000 new cases of hydronephrosis are diagnosed each year with a 2:1 male-to-female prevalence.  The rate of occurrence in people is 0.15% to 0.67% (p. 135).  <br>Hydronephrosis is also the most common urological condition discovered during routine prenatal sonography.  Jenna Laquerre states in 2020, that boys are four-to-five times more likely to be born with hydronephrosis than girls.  Hydronephrosis does not run-in families, although some causes of hydronephrosis, such as vesicoureteral reflux, may run in families.  Hydronephrosis is not linked to anything parents did or did not do during pregnancy so there is nothing that could have been done to cause or prevent hydronephrosis of the child’s kidney(s).
<br>Diagnosing hydronephrosis has a few steps.  The first step to proper diagnoses would include a physician ordering a blood and urine test to evaluate kidney function and signs of infections.  Secondly, a primary care physician may refer a urologist to schedule an ultrasound of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder.  Hydronephrosis is given a grade of 1, 2, 3 or 4, with 1 representing very minimal dilation and 4 representing severe dilation.  Depending on the severity of the swelling of kidneys, the next step of the diagnoses would be to have a renal sonography scan performed.  This step is a little more invasive than an ultrasound and requires infants to be put to sleep with a light anesthetic, so they do not move during the procedure.  A renal sonography is a time-efficient imaging modality for examining the urinary system in real time, and color Doppler is a reliable method for diagnosing and evaluating hydronephrosis.  
<br>Identifying the cause of hydronephrosis determines the treatment of this condition.  Infants born with unilateral or bilateral hydronephrosis are often monitored with ultrasounds every three months until one year of age.  They are often prescribed a low dose of antibiotics, as stated in the study by McAlister University on page 7-8, to prevent any potential infections regarding the urinary tract.  If the hydronephrosis diagnoses stays below grade two, monitoring with ultrasounds continue once a year.  However, if the hydronephrosis progresses to grade three or worse, a renal sonography scan may be requested by the doctor to determine where the backflow of urine is happening and if surgery is required.  Surgery is recommended only in severe cases when kidney function is at risk either due to obstruction or recurrent urinary tract infections.  The goal of the operation would be to open the obstruction.  This would allow the urine to flow freely, relieving the pressure build-up in the kidney.  
<br>The type of surgery depends on the where the obstruction is in the urinary system.  A pediatric urologist would discuss where the obstruction is located and what operation is best to treat the obstruction.  Typically, incisions are 5 cm or less.  Through this small incision, the surgeon would remove the obstructed area and reconnect the kidney’s drainage system.  Children typically stay in the hospital for about two to three days.  They heal in two to three weeks.  The success rate is about 95 percent.  In adults, according to Winchester Hospital, some surgery options to correct hydronephrosis may include: 
<br>•	Fixing defects in the kidney
<br>•	Removing a kidney stone that will not pass on its own
<br>•	Medicines to treat infection or ease pain
<br>•	Inserting a tube to drain excess urine
<br>•	Taking out of all or part of the kidney (rare)
<br>The prognosis of hydronephrosis depends on the severity of the condition.  In unilateral hydronephrosis, a person can live with only one kidney.  However, in isolated mild hydronephrosis the prognosis is excellent.  Oftentimes, children grow up to no longer have issues with their kidneys or ureters, showing no symptoms that they were ever diagnosed with hydronephrosis.  While other children may grow up and have scars from surgeries, where it was needed to remove blockages.  Adults, however, if developing hydronephrosis late in their life, may need to continue monitoring with ultrasounds and renal scans to prevent potential kidney damage.  Proper monitoring, maintaining a healthy lifestyle and paying attention to over-the-counter medication may reduce further kidney damage.  However, without proper monitoring, the kidneys could become severely damaged or destroyed completely without any knowledge of them doing so.
<br>As stated, proper monitoring helps doctors see any changes in the kidneys over the years.  Additional kidney health may include daily exercising.  Maintaining proper muscle mass and heart regulation through exercising or physical activities helps regulate other organs.  By keeping the rest of the organs healthy and functioning properly, this relieves pressure off the kidneys to create or filter out hormones like insulin or glucose.  Healthy nutrition and reduction of alcohol intake help the kidneys by not having them overwork to filter out additional metabolic wastes that are not necessary for the body to survive.  
<br>Severely damaged kidneys are usually labeled as acute kidney failure, also known as acute renal failure, and can cause many complications such as fluid buildup, chest pain, muscle weakness, permanent kidney damage, and/or death.  Fluid buildup can occur in the lungs which then results in respiratory distress with shortness of breath.  Chest pain may arise when the pericardium, the lining that covers the heart, becomes inflamed.  Since the kidneys control and regulate fluids and the acid-base balance, acute renal failure throws the blood chemistry off balance which causes the muscle weakness.  Occasionally, acute kidney failure causes permanent loss of kidney function, or end-stage renal disease.  As stated in Mayoclinic, people with end-stage renal disease require either permanent dialysis — a mechanical filtration process used to remove toxins and wastes from the body — or a kidney transplant to survive.  Nevertheless, acute renal failure can lead to loss of all kidney function and, eventually, death.  
<br>To try and prevent the ultimate outcome of complete renal failure and death, studies are currently being performed to try to prevent and the delay kidney damage.  A current study being performed by McAlister University in 2020 which focuses on the relationship of antibiotics and frequency of urinary tract infections in 160 chosen children and reads as followed:
<br>The study focuses on the relationship between prophylaxis antibiotics and frequency of urinary tract infections in children diagnosed with antenatal hydronephrosis.  Hydronephrosis is the most common fetal abnormality occurring in 1-5% of all pregnancies.  Currently, with the widespread accessibility of antenatal ultrasound, the detection of hydronephrosis has become even more common.  As a result, thousands of infants with hydronephrosis have been seen and managed by pediatricians, pediatric nephrologists, pediatric urologists, and family physicians.  The investigators need to determine if antibiotic prophylaxis is effective in reducing the number of urinary tract infections in this population.
<br>The study is being performed on children between the ages of birth and 18 months and is trying to determine whether the introduction to antibiotics reduces the chances of obtaining a urinary tract infection by giving the controlled group of infants diagnosed with hydronephrosis a placebo antibiotic while the other infants in the treatment group receive actual antibiotics.  As part of standard medical care, the patient and family are scheduled for renal-bladder ultrasounds and outpatient pediatric urology clinic visits at the local recruitment sites (i.e.  McMaster Children's Hospital, The Hospital for Sick Children or, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario) during months at baseline, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months.  During these clinic appointments, the research coordinator will follow up with patient and family regarding their progress in the study.  The Research Coordinator will ask about any side effects from trial medication such as nausea, vomiting, gastroenteritis, anaphylactic reactions and ensure their questions or concerns are addressed.
<br>Data from patient's ultrasound assessment and renal scans will also be collected.  In addition to clinic follow ups, patients and their families will be contacted monthly (excluding the months patient is scheduled for clinical follow up) by the Research Coordinator to further monitor patient's study progress.  Families will be instructed to call the Research Coordinator at the first sign of febrile UTI (fever, loss of appetite, abdominal pain) and advised to seek medical assistance (bring their child to the Emergency Department at the local study institution).  The baby will then have a dipstick taken to test for positive nitrites and leukocytes.  If positive, patients are to have a urine sample via catheter specimen taken and if positive, be taken off study medication and be treated for febrile UTI according to standard medical practice.  In this case the family and healthcare providers will not be unblinded to the participant's treatment allocation as this information is not required in order to treat the infant.  (Luis H Braga, MD, MSc, PhD, 2019)
<br>As seen by this research study, it is important to determine if antibiotics are helpful in infants to prevent urinary tract infects.  Weighing the negative side effects of antibiotics and if they are helpful or even needed to prevent urinary tract infections is crucial.  According to Harvard Health Publishing (2007), it is safe to take long-term antibiotics as a preventative measure.  The most common side effects of long-term usage of prophylaxis antibiotics include diarrhea, nausea, and yeast infections of the vagina or mouth.  Diarrhea in infants can cause complications like dehydration if not monitored correctly.  Dehydration means that the body has lost too much fluid and can happen with vomiting and/or diarrhea.  According to Seattle Children’s Hospital, dehydration is the most important complication of diarrhea. Signs of dehydration include but are not limited to decreased urine output (no urine in more than 8 hours) and/or dark yellow urine happens early in dehydration.  In babies, a depressed or sunken soft spot often appears during dehydration.  Infants may also act fussy, tired out or acting ill.  So, if antibiotics do not prove helpful for urinary tract infections in infants, it should be studied and known so the infants are not put at risk from the antibiotics.
<br>At the end of the day, hydronephrosis can be a manageable disease or it can be life threatening if not properly taken care of.  Many factors come in to play regarding this disease.  Proper care consisting of checkups, nutrition, and foregoing alcohol or toxins that are unnecessary to survive are the easiest ways to decrease the chances of acute renal failure due to hydronephrosis.  If the swelling of the kidneys goes unnoticed or unchecked, they could continuously expand and create more issues regarding not just the urinary tract system, but other parts of the body including the endocrine system, respiratory system, and cardiovascular system.  Such easy steps as monthly or yearly ultrasounds should not prevent someone from monitoring their hydronephrosis.  This disease needs to be monitored and early prevention is the first step to not letting the disease spread beyond repair. 
<br>
<br>References
<br>By the way, doctor: Is it okay to take antibiotics indefinitely to prevent urinary tract infections? Health Harvard. https://www.health.harvard.edu/newsletter_article/By_the_way_doctor_Is_it_okay_to_take_antibiotics_indefinitely_to_prevent_urinary_tract_infections
<br>Carol DerSarkissian (2019, May 08) What is Vesicoureteral Reflux? Webmd https://www.webmd.com/children/vesicoureteral-reflux#1
<br>Diarrhea. Seattle Childrens. https://www.seattlechildrens.org/conditions/a-z/diarrhea-0-12-months/
<br>Health Library.  Winchester Hospital. https://www.winchesterhospital.org/health-library/article?id=96647
<br>Hydronephrosis. Kidney.org.  https://www.kidney.org/atoz/content/hydronephrosis
<br>Jenna Laquerre, BS, R.T.(R), RDMS, RVT (2020, Nov/Dec) Radiologic Technology Vol.  92 (Issue 2), p135-153, EBSCOhost
<br>Kidney Failure.  Mayoclinic.org.  https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/kidney-failure/symptoms-causes/syc-20369048
<br>Luis H Braga, MD, MSc, PhD (2019 March) Effectiveness of Antibiotics Versus Placebo to Treat Antenatal Hydronephrosis ICHGCP https://ichgcp.net/clinical-trials-registry/NCT01140516
<br>Mayo Clinic Staff (2020, Jan.  15) Hydronephrosis Mayoclinic https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/hydronephrosis/cdc-20397563
<br>Saladin (2018) ‘Appendix F: Lexicon of Biomedical Word Elements’ in Saladin: Anatomy and Physiology: The Unity of Form and Function, Eighth Edition McGraw-Hill Education New York, NY 
<br>Saladin (2018) ‘Chapter 23: The Urinary System’ in Saladin: Anatomy and Physiology: The Unity of Form and Function, Eighth Edition McGraw-Hill Education New York, NY p.  886
